dantalian(1) -- file tagging using hard links
=============================================

## SYNOPSIS

`dantalian` [<options>] <command> [<args>]

## DESCRIPTION

`dantalian` provides an interface to scripts that automate management of
file tagging using hard links.

## OPTIONS

* `-h`, `--help`:
  Print help information.

## COMMANDS

There are three types of commands.  Library commands require a library.
`dantalian` will search up the directory tree from the working directory
and use the first library it finds, or a library can be specified
explicitly by path.

Global commands do not require a library.  Socket commands require a
virtual FUSE library, and simply write commands to the virtual FUSE
library's command socket

### LIBRARY COMMANDS

* `dantalian-tag`(1):
  Tag files.
* `dantalian-untag`(1):
  Untag files.
* `dantalian-mktag`(1):
  Make tags.
* `dantalian-rmtag`(1):
  Remove tags.
* `dantalian-tags`(1):
  List tags of files.
* `dantalian-find`(1):
  Find files with tags.
* `dantalian-rm`(1):
  Remove all tags of files.
* `dantalian-rename`(1):
  Rename tagged file.
* `dantalian-convert`(1):
  Convert directories into taggable symbolic links.
* `dantalian-revert`(1):
  Revert converted directories from symbolic links.
* `dantalian-fix`(1):
  Fix symbolic links of converted directories.
* `dantalian-clean`(1):
  Clean stored converted directories.
* `dantalian-mount`(1):
  Mount library as virtual FUSE library.

### GLOBAL COMMANDS

* `dantalian-init`(1):
  Initialize a library.

### SOCKET COMMANDS

* `dantalian-mknode`(1):
  Make a tag node.
* `dantalian-rmnode`(1):
  Remove nodes.

## SEE ALSO

* Online documentation:
  http://dantalian.readthedocs.org/
* Project website:
  http://darkfeline.github.io/dantalian/
