.. _fuse:

FUSE
====

dantalian offers an optional FUSE mount feature, which allows much more
powerful interaction with libraries.

To use it, run ``dantalian mount /path/to/mount/location`` on the
command line.  You will want to mount it somewhere outside of the
library.

In addition to projecting the library into virtual FUSE space, you will
also be able to set up virtual tag groups, which represent the
intersection of a set of tags.  The two configuration files are
``.dantalian/mount`` and ``.dantalian/mount_custom``.  If the latter
exists, it will be used; otherwise the former is used.  The first
configuration file is in JSON, and should look as follows::

   [
       {"mount": "/path/to/mount/location",
        "tags": ["tag1", "tag2", "tag3"]},
       {"mount": "/path/to/another/mount",
        "tags": ["more", "tags"]}
   ]

Alternately, you may provide a custom script, ``mount_custom``.  It
should be a Python module that contains a function with the signature
``maketree(root)``.  It will be passed the root of the library.  You may
write your own script to set up a node tree and return it, and dantalian
will handle the rest.  See :meth:`dantalian.library._maketree` to see
how dantalian creates a node tree from the JSON for an example.

Usage
-----

For the most part, FUSE-mounted libraries behave exactly like regular
libraries, so you can use the regular dantalian commands as well as
regular file system operations to interact with it.  However, certain
dantalian commands behave differently or are restricted for sanity's
sake (for example, you cannot ``mount`` a FUSE-mounted library).
dantalian distinguishes between a mounted library and a regular library
by a virtual directory ``.dantalian-fuse``, which simply points to
``.dantalian``.

To unmount, use ``fusermount -u path/to/mount``.

See :ref:`names` for more information.

Nodes and virtual space
-----------------------

dantalian manages the virtual space using a node tree.  Inheritance tree
of nodes:

* FSNode

  * BorderNode

    * TagNode
    * RootNode

FSNodes simply represent virtual directories.  BorderNode is an abstract
subclass for nodes that lead back into real space (back to the
underlying file system).  There are two types: TagNodes project the
intersection of their tags under themselves, whereas the RootNode (there
will only be one) projects the library root under itself.

Functionally, it is useful to divide the virtual space into categories.
Paths which point to nodes will be called nodespace.  Paths which point
to files directly under TagNodes are tagspace.  Paths which point more
than one directory beyond TagNodes or any files under RootNodes are
outsidespace.

Name conflicts
--------------

Specified mounts (nodes) will obscure any files or directories with the
same name under RootNode.

File name conflicts for files under TagNodes will be resolved by adding
the inode number (which is guaranteed to be unique) at the end of the
file name, but before the extension.  E.g., if two files are both named
``file.mp3``, the latter will appear as ``file.12345.mp3``, assuming its
inode number is ``12345``.

Socket Operations
-----------------

You can also interact directly with a FUSE-mounted library using socket
operations.  FUSE-mounted libraries open a socket at
``.dantalian/fuse.sock``.  dantalian provides scripts that allow you to
interact dynamically with a mounted library, but they simply echo
standard commands to the socket, which can be done by hand (like all
other dantalian operations) from, e.g. a remote client that doesn't have
dantalian installed.  For example, the socket command::

   $ dantalian mknode path/to/node tag1 tag2

can be done by::

   $ echo mknode path/to/node tag1 tag2 > library/.dantalian/fuse.sock

The socket processes commands much like a shell, so make sure to quote
anything that contains spaces.

Currently, the only socket command is ``mknode``, which dynamically adds
a TagNode.

FUSE Operations
---------------

FUSE intercepts calls to the kernel to perform file system operations,
allowing it to present a file system API in user space.  How it behaves
depends on how these operations are implemented.  See below for the
implemented operations and their behavior.  As a rule of thumb,
interaction with nodespace is extremely limited.  Calls to outsidespace
will be passed on to the OS/underlying file system.  Calls to tagspace
will manipulate the tags on the files according to the library paradigm.
